[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> Now perhaps the biggest fear
of aging is the fear of death.
And as long as
you are identified
with your separateness and
you think that's what you are,
you will have fear.
And if you cultivate
the part of you
that is not identified
with your separateness,
you will have a place in
you that is not afraid,
as well as the place
in you that is afraid.
You'll have a balancing
of those things.
And you might even
get light enough.
A zen monk is dying and his
students say to him, master,
you haven't written
your death poem yet.
And he says, oh, I haven't
written my death poem.
And he grabs the brush and
he calligraphies madly,
and he dies.
And it says birth is thus.
Death is thus.
Verse or no verse,
what's the fuss?
My guru was walking with
one of his old devotees
and he started to laugh.
And the old devotee said,
what are you laughing about?
He says, well so-and-so, this
old woman devotee just died.
And the friend said, what
are you laughing about?
What are you some
kind of a butcher?
And Maharaji said
to him, would you
like me to make believe
it's all that real?
Now the question is,
where does somebody go?
What happens?
It's a mystery.
When I sit with that mystery,
all the experiences I've had,
I don't even have a
flicker of anything other
than an appreciation that
when we drop our body,
we just drop our body.
Ramana Maharshi is
dying and the people
say, don't leave, don't leave.
And he says, don't be silly.
Where could I go?
It's just a shift of form.
And if you have loved
somebody in the love
that transcends form,
even for a moment,
you and they aren't
going anywhere.
Your mind may say they've gone.
But that's your mind.
The minute you quiet down
and go back into your heart,
they're right there again.
And love really does
transcend death.
There's not even a doubt
in my mind about it.
And you remember what
I said to Emmanuel?
Emmanuel, what shall I
tell people about dying?
He said, tell them
it's absolutely safe.
He said, it's like
taking off a tight shoe.
Buddha said, do you
know how many times
you have taken birth like this?
He said, imagine a mountain
6 miles long, 6 miles wide,
and 6 miles high.
And every 100 years a bird
flies over the mountain
with a silk scarf in its beak.
And it runs the scarf across the
mountain once every 100 years.
In the length of time
it would take the scarf
to wear away the mountain,
that's how long you've
been doing this.
It sure gives you a different
perspective, doesn't it,
about time and the
meaning of a life?
Can you see a life as so
precious and beautiful,
and still learn how
to hold on tightly,
let go lightly, how
to not cling to it,
how to be open to the mystery,
and open to the next part
of it, by saying, OK, and
now this, and now this?
In the Tibetan tradition
when you're dying,
you are trained to
stay in the moment.
Instead of the
model, I am dying,
you are just in the moment.
The Earth element leaves.
You notice heaviness.
The water element leaves.
You notice dryness.
The fire element leaves.
You notice coldness.
The air element leaves.
You notice the outbreath is
longer than the inbreath.
Just moment, moment, moment,
now this, now this, now this.
I have been sitting now
with dying people for 10--
15 years I guess.
And I can tell you
that it is the richest
experience of my life.
It is such incredible grace.
The two things that awaken
the same feelings in me
are being present at a birth
and being present at a death.
And at that moment
of death, when
you feel the awareness
leave the body,
and when that
person's connection
to that which is
beyond their body
is deep enough because they
have relaxed the mind that
keeps grabbing at
their separateness,
so that they can just
let go very gently.
There's not even a ripping.
There's not a pushing.
There's not a grabbing.
The whole secret is to live
this moment fully, now this one,
now this one.
So if you're in
this one, how do you
know the next one may
be the one you die in?
The best preparation
for your dying
is that you live this moment
now, fully, moment by moment.
And then one of them will
be the one in which you
drop your body, and it'll just
be another moment, nothing
special.
It's not really that dramatic.
We milk it so much,
such a big drama.
Will he die, or won't
he die, should she die?
Sure, we're all going to die.
I want to tell you a secret.
You're all going to die.
But though you perish,
you will not die.
The whole secret is of
extricating yourself
from identification with form,
because all form corrupts.
It all dies.
You take care of it.
You honor it.
You clean it up.
You keep it healthy as
it is slowly corrupting.
Hold on tightly.
Let go lightly.
[MUSIC PLAYING]